---
title: "Reduced Instruction Set Compute／Computer (RISC)"
created: 2020-01-04T13:40:06.669-06:00
modified: 2025-06-27T14:53:44.312-05:00
parent: "[[Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)]]"
children:
  - "[[ARM (Advanced RISC Machine - Acorn RISC Machine)]]"
  - "[[Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipelined Stages (MIPS) Architecture]]"
  - "[[PowerPC]]"
  - "[[RISC-V]]"
  - "[[Scalable Processor Architecture (SPARC)]]"
  - "[[Xtensa]]"
---
###### Reduced Instruction Set Compute/Computer (RISC)
````excerpt
- is a type of [[Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)]]
- simple instructions that typically take 1 clock cycle to execute
- requires more instructions and therefore more memory than [[Complex Instruction Set Compute／Computer (CISC)|CISC]]
- the burden of complexity is placed on the software
````
^excerpt

# RISC - What is It?

> [!expand-ui]- What is RISC?
> <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>WARNING: you may want to print this one to read it...</code><br><code>(from preceding discussion):</code><br><code>:Anyway, it is not a fair comparison.  Not by a long stretch.  Let's see</code><br><code>:how the Nth generation SPARC, MIPS, and 88K's do (assuming they last)</code><br><code>:compared to some new design from scratch.</code><br><code></code><br><code>Well, there is baggage and there is BAGGAGE.</code><br><code>One must be careful to distinguish between ARCHITECTURE and IMPLEMENTATION:</code><br><code>	a) Architectures persist longer than implementations, especially</code><br><code>	user-level Instruction-Set Architecture.</code><br><code>	b) The first member of an architecture family is usually designed</code><br><code>	with the current implementation constraints in mind, and if you're</code><br><code>	lucky, software people had some input.</code><br><code>	c) If you're really lucky, you anticipate 5-10 years of technology</code><br><code>	trends, and that modifies your idea of the ISA you commit to.</code><br><code>	d) It's pretty hard to delete anything from an ISA, except where:</code><br><code>		1) You can find that NO ONE uses a feature</code><br><code>			(the 68020 to 68030 deletions mentioned by someone</code><br><code>			else).</code><br><code>		2) You believe that you can trap and emulate the feature</code><br><code>		"fast enough".</code><br><code>			i.e., microVAX support for decimal ops,</code><br><code>			68040 support for transcendentals.</code><br><code></code><br><code>Now, one might claim that the i486 and 68040 are RISC implementations</code><br><code>of CISC architectures .... and I think there is some truth to this,</code><br><code>but I also think that it can confuse things badly:</code><br><code></code><br><code>Anyone who has studied the history of computer design knows that</code><br><code>high-performance designs have used many of the same techniques for years,</code><br><code>for all of the natural reasons, that is:</code><br><code>	a) They use as much pipelining as they can, in some cases, if this</code><br><code>	means a high gate-count, then so be it.</code><br><code>	b) They use caches (separate I & D if convenient).</code><br><code>	c) They use hardware, not micro-code for the simpler operations.</code><br><code>(For instance, look at the evolution of the S/360 products.</code><br><code>Recall that the 360/85 used caches, back around 1969, and within a few</code><br><code>years, so did any mainframe or supermini.)</code><br><code></code><br><code>So, what difference is there among machines if similar implementation</code><br><code>ideas are used?</code><br><code>A: there is a very specific set of characteristics shared by most</code><br><code>machines labeled RISCs, most of which are not shared by most CISCs.</code><br><code>The RISC characteristics:</code><br><code>	a) Are aimed at more performance from current compiler technology</code><br><code>	(i.e., enough registers).</code><br><code>OR</code><br><code>	b) Are aimed at fast pipelining</code><br><code>		in a virtual-memory environment</code><br><code>		with the ability to still survive exceptions</code><br><code>		without inextricably increasing the number of gate delays</code><br><code>		(notice that I say gate delays, NOT just how many gates).</code><br><code></code><br><code>Even though various RISCs have made various decisions, most of them</code><br><code>have been very careful to omit those things that CPU designers have</code><br><code>found difficult and/or expensive to implement, and especially, things</code><br><code>that are painful, for relatively little gain.</code><br><code></code><br><code>I would claim, that even as RISCs evolve, they may have certain</code><br><code>baggage that they'd wish weren't there .... but not very much.  In</code><br><code>particular, there are a bunch of objective characteristics shared by</code><br><code>RISC ARCHITECTURES that clearly distinguish them from CISC</code><br><code>architectures.</code><br><code></code><br><code>I'll give a few examples, followed by the detailed analysis:</code><br><code></code><br><code>MOST RISCs:</code><br><code>	3a) Have 1 size of instruction in an instruction stream</code><br><code>	3b) And that size is 4 bytes</code><br><code>	3c) Have a handful (1-4) addressing modes) (\* it is VERY</code><br><code>	hard to count these things; will discuss later).</code><br><code>	3d) Have NO indirect addressing in any form (i.e., where you need</code><br><code>	one memory access to get the address of another operand in memory)</code><br><code>	4a) Have NO operations that combine load/store with arithmetic,</code><br><code>	i.e., like add from memory, or add to memory.</code><br><code>	(note: this means especially avoiding operations that use the</code><br><code>	value of a load as input to an ALU operation, especially when</code><br><code>	that operation can cause an exception.  Loads/stores with</code><br><code>	address modification can often be OK as they don't have some of</code><br><code>	the bad effects)</code><br><code>	4b) Have no more than 1 memory-addressed operand per instruction</code><br><code>	5a) Do NOT support arbitrary alignment of data for loads/stores</code><br><code>	5b) Use an MMU for a data address no more than once per instruction</code><br><code>	6a) Have \>= 5 bits per integer register specifier</code><br><code>	6b) Have \>= 4 bits per FP register specifier</code><br><code>These rules provide a rather distinct dividing line among architectures,</code><br><code>and I think there are rather strong technical reasons for this, such</code><br><code>that there is one more interesting attribute: almost every architecture</code><br><code>whose first instance appeared on the market from 1986 onward obeys the</code><br><code>rules above .....</code><br><code>	Note that I didn't say anything about counting the number of</code><br><code>	instructions....</code><br><code>So, here's a table:</code><br><code>C: number of years since first implementation sold in this family</code><br><code>(or first thing which with this is binary compatible).</code><br><code>3a: \# instruction sizes</code><br><code>3b: maximum instruction size in bytes</code><br><code>3c: number of distinct addressing modes for accessing data (not jumps)\></code><br><code>I didn't count register or</code><br><code>literal, but only ones that referenced memory, and I counted different</code><br><code>formats with different offset sizes separately.  This was hard work...</code><br><code>Also, even when a machine had different modes for register-relative and</code><br><code>PC\_relative addressing, I counted them only once.</code><br><code>3d: indirect addressing: 0: no, 1: yes</code><br><code>4a: load/store combined with arithmetic: 0: no, 1:yes</code><br><code>4b: maximum number of memory operands</code><br><code>5a: unaligned addressing of memory references allowed in load/store,</code><br><code>	without specific instructions</code><br><code>	0: no never (MIPS, SPARC, etc)</code><br><code>	1: sometimes (as in RS/6000)</code><br><code>	2: just about any time</code><br><code>5b: maximum number of MMU uses for data operands in an instruction</code><br><code>6a: number of bits for integer register specifier</code><br><code>6b: number of bits for 64-bit or more FP register specifier,</code><br><code>	distinct from integer registers</code><br><code></code><br><code>Note that all of this are ARCHITECTURE issues, and it is usually quite</code><br><code>difficult to either delete a feature (3a-5b) or increase the number</code><br><code>of real registers (6a-6b) given an initial instruction set design.</code><br><code>(yes, register renaming can help, but...)</code><br><code></code><br><code>Now: items 3a, 3b, and 3c are an indication of the decode complexity</code><br><code>	3d-5b hint at the ease or difficulty of pipelining, especially</code><br><code>	in the presence of virtual-memory requirements, and need to go</code><br><code>	fast while still taking exceptions sanely</code><br><code>	items 6a and 6b are more related to ability to take good advantage</code><br><code>	of current compilers.</code><br><code>	There are some other attributes that can be useful, but I couldn't</code><br><code>	imagine how to create metrics for them without being very subjective;</code><br><code>	for example "degree of sequential decode", "number of write-backs</code><br><code>	that you might want to do in the middle of an instruction, but can't,</code><br><code>	because you have to wait to make sure you see all of the instruction</code><br><code>	before committing any state, because the last part might cause a</code><br><code>	page fault,"  or "irregularity/assymetricness of register use",</code><br><code>	or "irregularity/complexity of instruction formats".  I'd love to</code><br><code>	use those, but just don't know how to measure them.</code><br><code>	Also, I'd be happy to hear corrections for some of these.</code><br><code></code><br><code>So, here's a table of 12 implementations of various architectures, one</code><br><code>per architecture, with the attributes above.  Just for fun, I'm going</code><br><code>to leave the architectures coded at first, although I'll identify them</code><br><code>later.  I'm going to draw a line between H1 and L4 (obviously, the</code><br><code>RISC-CISC Line), and also, at the head of each column, I'm going to</code><br><code>put a rule, which, in that column, most of the RISCs obey.  Any RISC</code><br><code>that does not obey it is marked with a +; any CISC that DOES obey it</code><br><code>is marked with a \*.  So...</code><br><code></code><br><code>CPU	Age	3a 3b 3c 3d	4a 4b 5a 5b	6a 6b	\# ODD</code><br><code>RULE	\<6	=1 =4 \<5 =0	=0 =1 \<2 =1	\>4 \>3</code><br><code>-------------------------------------------------------------------------</code><br><code>A1	4	 1  4  1  0	 0  1  0  1	 8  3+	1</code><br><code>B1	5	 1  4  1  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	-</code><br><code>C1	2	 1  4  2  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	-</code><br><code>D1	2	 1  4  3  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  0+	1</code><br><code>E1	5	 1  4 10+ 0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	1</code><br><code>F1	5	 2+ 4  1  0	 0  1  0  1	 4+ 3+	3</code><br><code>G1	1	 1  4  4  0	 0  1  1  1	 5  5   -</code><br><code>H1	2	 1  4  4  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	-	RISC</code><br><code>---------------------------------------------------------------</code><br><code>L4	26	 4  8  2\* 0\*	 1  2  2  4	 4  2	2	CISC</code><br><code>M2	12	12 12 15  0\*	 1  2  2  4	 3  3	1</code><br><code>N1	10	21 21 23  1	 1  2  2  4	 3  3	-</code><br><code>O3	11	11 22 44  1	 1  2  2  8	 4  3	-</code><br><code>P3	13	56 56 22  1	 1  6  2 24	 4  0	-</code><br><code></code><br><code>An interesting exercise is to analyze the ODD cases.</code><br><code>First, observe that of 12 architectures, in only 2 cases does an</code><br><code>architecture have an attribute that puts it on the wrong side of the line.</code><br><code>Of the RISCs:</code><br><code></code><br><code>-A1 is slightly unusual in having more integer registers, and less FP</code><br><code>than usual.  \[Actually, slightly out of date, 29050 is different,</code><br><code>using integer register bank instead, I hear.\]</code><br><code></code><br><code>-D1 is unusual in sharing integer and FP registers (that's what the</code><br><code>D1:6b == 0).</code><br><code></code><br><code>-E1 seems odd in having a large number of address modes.  I think most</code><br><code>of this is an artifact of the way that I counted, as this architecture</code><br><code>really only has a fundamentally small number of ways to create</code><br><code>addresses, but has several different-sized offsets and combinations,</code><br><code>but all within 1 4-byte instruction; I believe that it's addressing</code><br><code>mechanisms are fundamentally MUCH simpler than, for example, M2, or</code><br><code>especially N1, O3, or P3, but the specific number doesn't capture it</code><br><code>very well.</code><br><code></code><br><code>-F1 .... is not sold any more.</code><br><code></code><br><code>-H1 one might argue that this process has 2 sizes of instructions, but</code><br><code>I'd observe that at any point in the instruction stream, the</code><br><code>instructions are either 4-bytes long, or 8-bytes long, with the</code><br><code>setting done by a mode bit, i.e., not dynamically encoded in every</code><br><code>instruction.</code><br><code></code><br><code>Of the processors called CISCs:</code><br><code></code><br><code>-L4 happens to be one in which you can tell the length of the</code><br><code>instruction from the first few bits, has a fairly regular instruction</code><br><code>decode, has relatively few addressing modes, no indirect addressing.</code><br><code>In fact, a big subset of its instructions are actually fairly</code><br><code>RISC-like, although another subset is very CISCy.</code><br><code></code><br><code>-M2 has a myriad of instruction formats, but fortunately avoided</code><br><code>indirect addressing, and actually, MOST of instructions only have 1</code><br><code>address, except for a small set of string operations with 2.  I.e., in</code><br><code>this case, the decode complexity may be high, but most instructions</code><br><code>cannot turn into multiple-memory-address-with-side-effects things.</code><br><code></code><br><code>-N1,O3, and P3 are actually fairly clean, orthogonal architectures, in</code><br><code>which most operations can consistently have operands in either memory</code><br><code>or registers, and there are relatively few weirdnesses of</code><br><code>special-cased uses of registers.  Unfortunately, they also have</code><br><code>indirect addressing, instruction formats whose very orthogonality</code><br><code>almost guarantees sequential decoding, where it's hard to even know</code><br><code>how long an instruction is until you parse each piece, and that may</code><br><code>have side-effects where you'd like to do a register write-back early,</code><br><code>but either:</code><br><code></code><br><code>	must wait until you see all of the instruction until you commit state</code><br><code>or</code><br><code>	must have "undo" shadow-registers</code><br><code>or</code><br><code>	must use instruction-continuation with fairly tricky exception</code><br><code>	handling to restore the state of the machine</code><br><code></code><br><code>It is also interesting to note that the original member of the family</code><br><code>to which O3 belongs was rather simpler in some of the critical areas,</code><br><code>with only 5 instruction sizes, of maximum size 10 bytes, and no</code><br><code>indirect addressing, and requiring alignment (i.e., it was a much more</code><br><code>RISC-like design, and it would be a fascinating speculation to know if</code><br><code>that extra complexity was useful in practice).  Now, here's the table</code><br><code>again, with the labels:</code><br><code></code><br><code></code><br><code>CPU	Age	3a 3b 3c 3d	4a 4b 5a 5b	6a 6b	\# ODD</code><br><code>RULE	\<6	=1 =4 \<5 =0	=0 =1 \<2 =1	\>4 \>3</code><br><code>-------------------------------------------------------------------------</code><br><code>A1	4	 1  4  1  0	 0  1  0  1	 8  3+	1	AMD 29K</code><br><code>B1	5	 1  4  1  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	-	R2000</code><br><code>C1	2	 1  4  2  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	-	SPARC</code><br><code>D1	2	 1  4  3  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  0+	1	MC88000</code><br><code>E1	5	 1  4 10+ 0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	1	HP PA</code><br><code>F1	5	 2+ 4  1  0	 0  1  0  1	 4+ 3+	3	IBM RT/PC</code><br><code>G1	1	 1  4  4  0	 0  1  1  1	 5  5   -	IBM RS/6000</code><br><code>H1	2	 1  4  4  0	 0  1  0  1	 5  4	-	Intel i860</code><br><code>---------------------------------------------------------------</code><br><code>L4	26	 4  8  2\* 0\*	 1  2  2  4	 4  2	2	IBM 3090</code><br><code>M2	12	12 12 15  0\*	 1  2  2  4	 3  3	1	Intel i486</code><br><code>N1	10	21 21 23  1	 1  2  2  4	 3  3	-	NSC 32016</code><br><code>O3	11	11 22 44  1	 1  2  2  8	 4  3	-	MC 68040</code><br><code>P3	13	56 56 22  1	 1  6  2 24	 4  0	-	VAX</code><br><code></code><br><code>General comment: this may sound weird, but in the long term, it might</code><br><code>be easier to deal with a really complicated bunch of instruction</code><br><code>formats, than with a complex set of addressing modes, because at least</code><br><code>the former is more amenable to pre-decoding into a cache of decoded</code><br><code>instructions that can be pipelined reasonably, whereas the pipeline on</code><br><code>the latter can get very tricky (examples to follow).  This can lead to</code><br><code>the funny effect that a relatively "clean", orthogonal architecture may</code><br><code>actually be harder to make run fast than one that is less clean.</code><br><code>Obviously, every weirdness has it's penalties....  But consider the</code><br><code>fundamental difficulty of pipelining something like (on a VAX):</code><br><code></code><br><code>	ADDL	@(R1)+,@(R1)+,@(R2)+</code><br><code></code><br><code>(I.e., something that, might theoretically arise from:</code><br><code>	register \*\*r1, \*\*r2;</code><br><code>	\*\*r2++ = \*\*r1++ + \*\*r1++;</code><br><code></code><br><code>Now, consider what the VAX has to do:</code><br><code>1) Decode the opcode (ADD)</code><br><code>2) Fetch first operand specifier from I-stream and work on it.</code><br><code>	a) Compute the memory address from (r1)</code><br><code>		If aligned</code><br><code>			run through MMU</code><br><code>				if MMU miss, fixup</code><br><code>			access cache</code><br><code>				if cache miss, do write-back/refill</code><br><code>		Elseif unaligned</code><br><code>			run through MMU for first part of data</code><br><code>				if MMU miss, fixup</code><br><code>			access cache for that part of data</code><br><code>				if cache miss, do write-back/refill</code><br><code>			run through MMU for second part of data</code><br><code>				if MMU miss, fixup</code><br><code>			access cache for second part of data</code><br><code>				if cache miss, do write-back/refill</code><br><code>		Now, in either case, we now have a longword that has the</code><br><code>		address of the actual data.</code><br><code>	b) Increment r1  \[well, this is where you'd LIKE to do it, or</code><br><code>	in parallel with step 2a).\]  However, see later why not...</code><br><code>	c) Now, fetch the actual data from memory, using the address just</code><br><code>	obtained, doing everything in step 2a) again, yielding the</code><br><code>	actual data, which we need to stick in a temporary buffer, since it</code><br><code>	doesn't actually go in a register.</code><br><code></code><br><code>3) Now, decode the second operand specifier, which goes thru</code><br><code>everything that we did in step 2, only again, and leaves the results</code><br><code>in a second temporary buffer. Note that we'd like to be starting this</code><br><code>before we get done with all of 2 (and I THINK the VAX9000 probably</code><br><code>does that??) but you have to be careful to bypass/interlock on</code><br><code>potential side-effects to registers .... actually, you may well have</code><br><code>to keep shadow copies of every register that might get written in the</code><br><code>instruction, since every operand can use auto-increment/decrement.</code><br><code>You'd probably want badly to try to compute the address of the second</code><br><code>argument and do the MMU access interleaved with the memory access of</code><br><code>the first, although the ability of any operand to need 2-4 MMU</code><br><code>accesses probably makes this tricky.  \[Recall that any MMU access may</code><br><code>well cause a page fault....\]</code><br><code></code><br><code>4) Now, do the add. \[could cause exception\]</code><br><code></code><br><code>5) Now, do the third specifier .... only, it might be a little</code><br><code>different, depending on the nature of the cache, that is, you cannot</code><br><code>modify cache or memory, unless you know it will complete.  (Why? well,</code><br><code>suppose that the location you are storing into overlaps with one of</code><br><code>the indirect-addressing words pointed to by r1 or 4(r1), and suppose</code><br><code>that the store was unaligned, and suppose that the last byte of the</code><br><code>store crossed a page boundary and caused a page fault, and that you'd</code><br><code>already written the first 3 bytes.  If you did this straightforwardly,</code><br><code>and then tried to restart the instruction, it wouldn't do the same</code><br><code>thing the second time.</code><br><code></code><br><code>6) When you're sure all is well, and the store is on its way, then you</code><br><code>can safely update the two registers, but you'd better wait until the</code><br><code>end, or else, keep copies of any modified registers until you're sure</code><br><code>it's safe.  (I think both have been done ??)</code><br><code></code><br><code>7) You may say that this code is unlikely, but it is legal, so the CPU must</code><br><code>do it.  This style has the following effects:</code><br><code>	a) You have to worry about unlikely cases.</code><br><code>	b) You'd like to do the work, with predictable uses of functional</code><br><code>	units, but instead, they can make unpredictable demands.</code><br><code>	c) You'd like to minimize the amount of buffering and state,</code><br><code>	but it costs you in both to go fast.</code><br><code>	d) Simple pipelining is very, very tough: for example, it is</code><br><code>	pretty hard to do much about the next instruction following the</code><br><code>	ADDL, (except some early decode, perhaps), without a lot of gates</code><br><code>	for special-casing.</code><br><code>	(I've always been amazed that CVAX chips are fast as they are,</code><br><code>	and VAX 9000s are REALLY impressive...)</code><br><code>	e) EVERY memory operand can potentially cause 4 MMU uses,</code><br><code>	and hence 4 MMU faults that might actually be page faults...</code><br><code>8) Consider how "lazy" RISC designers can be:</code><br><code>	a) Every load/store uses exactly 1 MMU access.</code><br><code>	b) The compilers are often free to re-arrange the order, even across</code><br><code>	what would have been the next instruction on a CISC.</code><br><code>	This gets rid of some stalls that the CISC may be stuck with</code><br><code>	(especially memory accesses).</code><br><code>	c) The alignment requirement avoids especially the problem with</code><br><code>	sending the first part of a store on the way before you're SURE</code><br><code>	that the second part of it is safe to do.</code><br><code></code><br><code>Finally, to be fair, let me add the two cases that I knew of that were more</code><br><code>on the borderline: i960 and Clipper:</code><br><code>CPU	Age	3a 3b 3c 3d	4a 4b 5a 5b	6a 6b	\# ODD</code><br><code>RULE	\<6	=1 =4 \<5 =0	=0 =1 \<2 =1	\>4 \>3</code><br><code>-------------------------------------------------------------------------</code><br><code>J1	5	 4+ 8+ 9+ 0      0  1  0  2      4+ 3+	5	Clipper</code><br><code>K1	3	 2+ 8+ 9+ 0	 0  1  2+ -      5  3+	5	Intel 960KB</code><br><code></code><br><code>SUMMARY:</code><br><code>	1) RISCs share certain architectural characteristics, although there</code><br><code>	are differences, and some of those differences matter a lot.</code><br><code>	2) However, the RISCs, as a group, are much more alike than the</code><br><code>	CISCs as a group.</code><br><code>	3) At least some of these architectural characteristics have fairly</code><br><code>	serious consequences on the pipelinability of the ISA, especially</code><br><code>	in a virtual-memory, cached environment.</code><br><code>	4) Counting instructions turns out to be fairly irrelevant:</code><br><code>		a) It's HARD to actually count instructions in a meaningful</code><br><code>		way... (if you disagree, I'll claim that the VAX is RISCier</code><br><code>		than any RISC, at least for part of its instruction set :-)</code><br><code>		Why: VAX has a MOV opcode, whereas RISCs usually have</code><br><code>	  	a whole set of opcodes for {LOAD/STORE} {BYTE, HALF, WORD}</code><br><code>		b) More instructions aren't what REALLY hurts you, anywhere</code><br><code>		near as much features that are hard to pipeline:</code><br><code>		c) RISCs can perfectly well have string-support, or decimal</code><br><code>		arithmetic support, or graphics transforms ... or lots of</code><br><code>		strange register-register transforms, and it won't cause</code><br><code>		problems .....  but compare that with the consequence of</code><br><code>		adding a single instruction that has 2-3 memory operands,</code><br><code>		each of which can go indirect, with auto-increments,</code><br><code>		and unaligned data...</code><br><code></code><br><code>======</code><br><code>Article: 30346 of comp.arch</code><br><code>Path: odin!mash.wpd.sgi.com!mash</code><br><code>Subject: Updated addressing mode table</code><br><code>Nntp-Posting-Host: mash.wpd.sgi.com</code><br><code></code><br><code>I promised to repost this with fixes, and people have been asking for</code><br><code>it, so here it is again: if you saw it before, all that's really</code><br><code>different is some fixes in the table, and a few clarified</code><br><code>explanations:</code><br><code></code><br><code>THE GIANT ADDDRESSING MODE TABLE (Corrections happily accepted) This</code><br><code>table goes with the higher-level table of general architecture</code><br><code>characteristics.</code><br><code></code><br><code>Address mode summary</code><br><code>r	register</code><br><code>r+	autoincrement (post)	\[by size of data object\]</code><br><code>-r	autodecrement (pre)	\[by size,...and this was the one I meant\]</code><br><code>\>r	modify base register	\[generally, effective address -\> base\]</code><br><code>				NOTE: sometimes this subsumes r+, -r, etc,</code><br><code>				and is more general, so I categorize it</code><br><code>				as a separate case.</code><br><code></code><br><code>d	displacement		d1 & d2 if 2 different displacements</code><br><code>x	index register</code><br><code>s	scaled index</code><br><code>a	absolute	\[as a separate mode, as opposed to displacement+(0)</code><br><code>I	Indirect</code><br><code></code><br><code>Shown below are 22 distinct addressing modes \[you can argue whether</code><br><code>these are right categories\].  In the table are the \*number\* of</code><br><code>different encodings/variations \[and this is a little fuzzy; you can</code><br><code>especially argue about the 4 in the HP PA column, I'm not even sure</code><br><code>that's right\].  For example, I counted as different variants on a mode</code><br><code>the case where the structure was the same, but there were</code><br><code>different-sized displacements that had to be decoded.  Note that</code><br><code>meaningfully counting addressing modes is \*at least as bad\* as</code><br><code>meaningfully counting opcodes; I did the best I could, and I spect a</code><br><code>lot of hours looking at manuals for the chips I hadn't programmed</code><br><code>much, and in some cases, even after hours, it was hard for me to</code><br><code>figure out meaningful numbers... \*Most\* of these architectures are used</code><br><code>in general-purpose systems and \*most\* have at least one version that</code><br><code>uses caches: those are important because many of the issues in</code><br><code>thinking about addressing modes come from their interactions with MMUs</code><br><code>and caches...</code><br><code></code><br><code></code><br><code>	1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20  21  22</code><br><code>							             r   r</code><br><code>						           r  r  r   +d1 +d1</code><br><code>	            r  r  r |              |   r  r |   r  r+ +d +d1 I   +s</code><br><code>	   r  r  r  +d +x +s|         s+ s+|s+ +d +d|r+ +d I  I  I   +s  I  </code><br><code>	r  +d +x +s \>r \>r \>r|r+ -r a  a  r+|-r +x +s|I  I  +s +s +d2 +d2 +d2</code><br><code>	-- -- -- -- -- -- --|-- -- -- -- --|-- -- --|-- -- -- -- --- --- ---</code><br><code>AMD 29K	 1		    |		   |	    |   </code><br><code>Rxxx	    1		    |		   |	    |   </code><br><code>SPARC	    1  1  	    |		   |	    |   </code><br><code>88K         1  1  1	    |		   |	    |   </code><br><code>HP PA       2  1  1  4  1  1|		   |	    |   </code><br><code>ROMP     1  2		    |		   |	    |    </code><br><code>POWER       1  1     1  1   |		   |	    |    </code><br><code>i860        1  1     1  1   |		   |	    |    </code><br><code>Swrdfish 1  1  1	    |       1	   |	    |    </code><br><code>ARM      2  2     2  1     1| 1  1</code><br><code>Clipper  1  3  1            | 1  1  2      |	    |    </code><br><code>i960KB   1  1  1  1  	    |       2  2   |    1   |    </code><br><code></code><br><code>S/360       1  		    |		        1   |    </code><br><code>i486     1  3  1  1	    | 1  1  2      |    2  3|   </code><br><code>NSC32K      3		    | 1  1  3  3   |   	   3|    	  9 	  </code><br><code>MC68000  1  1		    | 1  1  2	   |	2   | </code><br><code>MC68020  1  1		    | 1  1  2	   |	2  4|  	      	      16  16</code><br><code>VAX	 1  3     1	    | 1  1  1  1  1| 1     3| 1  3  1  3  </code><br><code></code><br><code></code><br><code>COLUMN NOTES:</code><br><code></code><br><code>1) Columns 1-7 are addressing modes used by many machines, but very</code><br><code>few, if any clearly-RISC architectures use anything else.  They are</code><br><code>all characterized by what they don't have:</code><br><code></code><br><code>	2 adds needed before generating the address</code><br><code>	indirect addressing</code><br><code>	variable-sized decoding</code><br><code></code><br><code>2) Columns 13-15 include fairly simple-looking addressing modes, which</code><br><code>however, \*may\* require 2 back-to-back adds beforet he address is</code><br><code>available.  \[\*may\* because some of them use index-register=0 or</code><br><code>something to avoid indexing, and usually in such machines, you'll see</code><br><code>variable timing figures, depending on use of indexing.\]</code><br><code></code><br><code>3) Columns 16-22 use indirect addressing.</code><br><code></code><br><code>ROW NOTES</code><br><code></code><br><code>1) Clipper & i960, of current chips, are more on the RISC-CISC border,</code><br><code>or are sort of "modern CISCs".  ARM is also characterized (by ARM</code><br><code>people, Hot Chips IV: "ARM is not a "pure RISC".</code><br><code></code><br><code>2) ROMP has a number of characteristics different from the rest of the</code><br><code>RISCs, you might call it "early RISC", and it is of course no longer</code><br><code>made.</code><br><code></code><br><code>3) You might consider HP PA a little odd, as it appears to have more</code><br><code>addressing modes, in the same way that CISCs do, but I don't think</code><br><code>this is the case: it's an issue of whether you call something several</code><br><code>modes or one mode with a modifier, just as there is trouble counting</code><br><code>opcodes (with & without modifiers).  From my view, neither PA nor</code><br><code>POWER have truly "CISCy" addressing modes.</code><br><code></code><br><code>4) Notice difference between 68000 and 68020 (and later 68Ks): a bunch</code><br><code>of incredibly-general & complex modes got added...</code><br><code></code><br><code>5) Note that the addressing on the S/360 is actually pretty simple,</code><br><code>mostly base+displacement, although RX-addressing does take 2</code><br><code>regs+offset.</code><br><code></code><br><code>6) A dimension \*not\* shown on this particular chart, but also highly</code><br><code>relevant, is that this chart shows the different \*types\* of modes,</code><br><code>\*not\* how many addresses can be found in each instruction.  That may</code><br><code>be worth noting also:</code><br><code>	AMD : i960	1	one address per instruction</code><br><code>	S/360 - MC68020	2	up to 2 addresses</code><br><code>	VAX		6	up to 6</code><br><code></code><br><code>By looking at alignment, indirect addressing, and looking only at</code><br><code>those chips that have MMUs, consider the number of times an MMU</code><br><code>\*might\* be used per instruction for data address translations:</code><br><code>	AMD - Clipper	2		\[Swordfish & i960KB: no TLB\]</code><br><code>	S/360 - NSC32K	4</code><br><code>	MC68Ks (all)	8</code><br><code>	VAX		24</code><br><code></code><br><code>When RS/6000 does unaligned, it must be in the same cache line (and</code><br><code>thus also in same MMU page), and traps to software otherwise, thus</code><br><code>avoiding numerous ugly cases.</code><br><code></code><br><code>Note: in some sense, S/360s & VAXen can use an arbitrary number of</code><br><code>translations per instruction, with MOVE CHARACTER LONG, or similar</code><br><code>operations & I don't count them as more, because they're defined to be</code><br><code>interruptable/restartable, saving state in general-purpose registers,</code><br><code>rather than hidden internal state.</code><br><code></code><br><code>SUMMARY:</code><br><code>1) Computer design styles mostly changed from machines with:</code><br><code>	2-6 addresses per instruction, with variable sized encoding</code><br><code>	address specifiers were usually "orthogonal", so that any could ggo</code><br><code>		anywhere in an instruction</code><br><code>	sometimes indirect addressing</code><br><code>	sometimes need 2 adds \*before\* effective address is available</code><br><code>	sometimes with many potential MMU accesses (and possible exceptions)</code><br><code>		per instruction, often buried in the middle of the instruction,</code><br><code>		and often \*after\* you'd normally want to commit state because</code><br><code>		of auto-increment or other side effects.</code><br><code>to machines with:</code><br><code>	1 address per instruction</code><br><code>	address specifiers encoded in small \# of bits in 32-bit instruction</code><br><code>	no indirect addressing</code><br><code>	never need 2 adds before address available</code><br><code>	use MMU once per data access</code><br><code></code><br><code>and we usually call the latter group RISCs.  I say "changed" because</code><br><code>if you put this table together with the earlier one, which has the age</code><br><code>in years, the older ones were one way, and the newer ones are</code><br><code>different.</code><br><code></code><br><code>2) Now, ignoring any other features, but looking at this single</code><br><code>attribute (architectural addressing features and implementation</code><br><code>effects thereof), it ought to be clear that the machines in the first</code><br><code>part of the table are doing something \*technically\* different from</code><br><code>those in the second part of the table.  Thus, people may sometimes</code><br><code>call something RISC that isn't, for marketing reasons, but the people</code><br><code>calling the first batch RISC really did have some serious technical</code><br><code>issues at heart.</code><br><code></code><br><code>3) One more time: this is \*not\* to say that RISC is better than CISC,</code><br><code>or that the few in the middle are bad, or anything like that ... but</code><br><code>that there are clear technical characteristics...</code><br><code> </code><br><code></code><br><code></code><br><code>-- </code><br><code>-john mashey    DISCLAIMER: generic disclaimer, I speak for me only, etc</code><br><code>UUCP:    mash@sgi.com </code><br><code>DDD:    415-390-3090	FAX: 415-967-8496</code><br><code>USPS:   Silicon Graphics 6L-005, 2011</code><br><code>        N. Shoreline Blvd, Mountain View, CA 94039-7311</code></span>
# RISC - Types
- [[ARM (Advanced RISC Machine - Acorn RISC Machine)]]
- [[Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipelined Stages (MIPS) Architecture]]
- [[PowerPC]]
- [[RISC-V]]
- [[Scalable Processor Architecture (SPARC)]]
- [[Xtensa]]

- Alpha
- ARC
- AVR
- PA-RISC
- PIC
