---
publish: true
title: Java - How to Write an Equality Method in Java
created: 2020-12-07T22:47:32.051-06:00
modified: 2020-12-07T22:52:09.969-06:00
---

original article: <https://www.artima.com/lejava/articles/equality.html>

In Item 8 of <em>Effective Java</em>, Josh Bloch describes the difficulty of preserving the <code>equals</code> contract when subclassing as a “fundamental problem of equivalence relations in object-oriented languages.” Bloch writes:

> <em>There is no way to extend an instantiable class and add a value component while preserving the equals contract, unless you are willing to forgo the benefits of object-oriented abstraction.</em>

Chapter 28 of <em>Programming in Scala</em> shows an approach that allows subclasses to extend an instantiable class, add a value component, and nevertheless preserve the <code>equals</code> contract. Although in the technique is described in the book in the context of defining Scala classes, it is also applicable to classes defined in Java. In this article, we present the technique using text adapted from the relevant section of <em>Programming in Scala</em>, but with the code examples translated from Scala into Java.

# Common Equality Pitfalls

Class <code>java.lang.Object</code> defines an <code>equals</code> method, which subclasses may override. Unfortunately, it turns out that writing a correct equality method is surprisingly difficult in object-oriented languages. In fact, after studying a large body of Java code, the authors of a 2007 paper concluded that almost all implementations of <code>equals</code> methods are faulty.

This is problematic, because equality is at the basis of many other things. For one, a faulty equality method for a type <code>C</code> might mean that you cannot reliably put an object of type <code>C</code> in a collection. You might have two elements <code>elem1</code>, <code>elem2</code> of type <code>C</code> that are equal, <em>i.e.</em>, “<code>elem1.equals(elem2)</code>” yields <code>true</code>. Nevertheless, with commonly occurring faulty implementations of the <code>equals</code> method, you could still see behavior like the following: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Set\<C> hashSet = new java.util.HashSet\<C>();</code><br><code>hashSet.add(elem1);</code><br><code>hashSet.contains(elem2);    // returns false!</code></span>

Here are four common pitfalls that can cause inconsistent behavior when overriding <code>equals</code>:

> [!expand-ui]- Defining equals with the wrong signature
> Consider adding an equality method to the following class of simple points: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class Point {</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final int x;</code><br><code>    private final int y;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public Point(int x, int y) {</code><br><code>        this.x = x;</code><br><code>        this.y = y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getX() {</code><br><code>        return x;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    // ...</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> A seemingly obvious, but wrong way would be to define it like this: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>// An utterly wrong definition of equals</code><br><code>public boolean equals(Point other) {</code><br><code>  return (this.getX() == other.getX() && this.getY() == other.getY());</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> What's wrong with this method? At first glance, it seems to work OK: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Point p1 = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code>Point p2 = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code></code><br><code>Point q = new Point(2, 3);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(p1.equals(p2)); // prints true</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(p1.equals(q)); // prints false</code></span>
>
> However, trouble starts once you start putting points into a collection: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>import java.util.HashSet;</code><br><code></code><br><code>HashSet\<Point> coll = new HashSet\<Point>();</code><br><code>coll.add(p1);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(p2)); // prints false</code></span>
>
> How can it be that <code>coll</code> does not contain <code>p2</code>, even though <code>p1</code> was added to it, and <code>p1</code> and <code>p2</code> are equal objects? The reason becomes clear in the following interaction, where the precise type of one of the compared points is masked. Define <code>p2a</code> as an alias of <code>p2</code>, but with type <code>Object</code> instead of <code>Point</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Object p2a = p2;</code></span>
>
> Now, were you to repeat the first comparison, but with the alias <code>p2a</code> instead of <code>p2</code>, you would get: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>System.out.println(p1.equals(p2a)); // prints false</code></span>
>
> What went wrong? In fact, the version of <code>equals</code> given previously does not override the standard method <code>equals</code>, because its type is different. Here is the type of the <code>equals</code> method as it is defined in the root class <code>Object</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public boolean equals(Object other)</code></span>
>
> Because the <code>equals</code> method in <code>Point</code> takes a <code>Point</code> instead of an <code>Object</code> as an argument, it does not override <code>equals</code> in <code>Object</code>. Instead, it is just an overloaded alternative. Overloading in Java is resolved by the static type of the argument, not the run-time type. So as long as the static type of the argument is <code>Point</code>, the <code>equals</code> method in <code>Point</code> is called. However, once the static argument is of type <code>Object</code>, the <code>equals</code> method in <code>Object</code> is called instead. This method has not been overridden, so it is still implemented by comparing object identity. That's why the comparison “<code>p1.equals(p2a)</code>” yields <code>false</code> even though points <code>p1</code> and <code>p2a</code> have the same <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> values. That's also why the <code>contains</code> method in <code>HashSet</code> returned <code>false</code>. Since that method operates on generic sets, it calls the generic <code>equals</code> method in <code>Object</code> instead of the overloaded variant in <code>Point</code>.
>
> A better <code>equals</code> method is the following: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>// A better definition, but still not perfect</code><br><code>@Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>    boolean result = false;</code><br><code>    if (other instanceof Point) {</code><br><code>        Point that = (Point) other;</code><br><code>        result = (this.getX() == that.getX() && this.getY() == that.getY());</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>    return result;</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> Now <code>equals</code> has the correct type. It takes a value of type <code>Object</code> as parameter and it yields a <code>boolean</code> result. The implementation of this method uses <code>instanceof</code> and a cast. It first tests whether the <code>other</code> object is also of type <code>Point</code>. If it is, it compares the coordinates of the two points and returns the result. Otherwise the result is <code>false</code>.

> [!expand-ui]- Changing equals without also changing hashCode
> If you repeat the comparison of <code>p1</code> and <code>p2a</code> with the latest definition of <code>Point</code> defined previously, you will get <code>true</code>, as expected. However, if you repeat the <code>HashSet.contains</code> test, you will probably still get <code>false</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Point p1 = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code>Point p2 = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code></code><br><code>HashSet\<Point> coll = new HashSet\<Point>();</code><br><code>coll.add(p1);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(p2)); // prints false (probably)</code></span>
>
> In fact, this outcome is not 100% certain. You might also get <code>true</code> from the experiment. If you do, you can try with some other points with coordinates 1 and 2. Eventually, you'll get one which is not contained in the set. What goes wrong here is that <code>Point</code> redefined <code>equals</code> without also redefining <code>hashCode</code>.
>
> Note that the collection in the example above is a <code>HashSet</code>. This means elements of the collection are put in “hash buckets” determined by their hash code. The <code>contains</code> test first determines a hash bucket to look in and then compares the given elements with all elements in that bucket. Now, the last version of class <code>Point</code> did redefine <code>equals</code>, but it did not at the same time redefine <code>hashCode</code>. So <code>hashCode</code> is still what it was in its version in class <code>Object</code>: some transformation of the address of the allocated object. The hash codes of <code>p1</code> and <code>p2</code> are almost certainly different, even though the fields of both points are the same. Different hash codes mean with high probability different hash buckets in the set. The <code>contains</code> test will look for a matching element in the bucket which corresponds to <code>p2</code>'s hash code. In most cases, point <code>p1</code> will be in another bucket, so it will never be found. <code>p1</code> and <code>p2</code> might also end up by chance in the same hash bucket. In that case the test would return <code>true</code>.
>
> The problem was that the last implementation of <code>Point</code> violated the contract on <code>hashCode</code> as defined for class <code>Object</code>:
>
> > <em>If two objects are equal according to the</em> <code>equals(Object)</code> <em>method, then calling the</em> <code>hashCode</code> <em>method on each of the two objects must produce the same integer result.</em>
>
> In fact, it's well known in Java that <code>hashCode</code> and <code>equals</code> should always be redefined together. Furthermore, <code>hashCode</code> may only depend on fields that <code>equals</code> depends on. For the <code>Point</code> class, the following would be a suitable definition of <code>hashCode</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class Point {</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final int x;</code><br><code>    private final int y;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public Point(int x, int y) {</code><br><code>        this.x = x;</code><br><code>        this.y = y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getX() {</code><br><code>        return x;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof Point) {</code><br><code>            Point that = (Point) other;</code><br><code>            result = (this.getX() == that.getX() && this.getY() == that.getY());</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    <strong>@Override public int hashCode() { return (41 \* (41 + getX()) + getY()); }</strong></code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> This is just one of many possible implementations of <code>hashCode</code>. Adding the constant <code>41</code> to one integer field <code>x</code>, multiplying the result with the prime number <code>41</code>, and adding to that result the other integer field <code>y</code> gives a reasonable distribution of hash codes at a low cost in running time and code size.
>
> Adding <code>hashCode</code> fixes the problems of equality when defining classes like <code>Point</code>. However, there are still other trouble spots to watch out for.

> [!expand-ui]- Defining equals in terms of mutable fields
> Consider the following slight variation of class <code>Point</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class Point { </code><br><code></code><br><code>    <strong>private int x; private int y;</strong></code><br><code></code><br><code>    public Point(int x, int y) {</code><br><code>        this.x = x;</code><br><code>        this.y = y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getX() {</code><br><code>        return x;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    <strong>public void setX(int x) { // Problematic this.x = x; } public void setY(int y) { this.y = y; }</strong></code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof Point) {</code><br><code>            Point that = (Point) other;</code><br><code>            result = (this.getX() == that.getX() && this.getY() == that.getY());</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public int hashCode() {</code><br><code>        return (41 \* (41 + getX()) + getY());</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> The only difference is that the fields <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> are no longer final, and two <code>set</code> methods have been added that allow clients to change the <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> values. The <code>equals</code> and <code>hashCode</code> methods are now defined in terms of these mutable fields, so their results change when the fields change. This can have strange effects once you put points in collections: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Point p = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code></code><br><code>HashSet\<Point> coll = new HashSet\<Point>();</code><br><code>coll.add(p);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(p)); // prints true</code></span>
>
> Now, if you change a field in point <code>p</code>, does the collection still contain the point? We'll try it: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>p.setX(p.getX() + 1);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(p)); // prints false (probably)</code></span>
>
> This looks strange. Where did <code>p</code> go? More strangeness results if you check whether the iterator of the set contains <code>p</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Iterator\<Point> it = coll.iterator();</code><br><code>boolean containedP = false;</code><br><code>while (it.hasNext()) {</code><br><code>    Point nextP = it.next();</code><br><code>    if (nextP.equals(p)) {</code><br><code>        containedP = true;</code><br><code>        break;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>}</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(containedP); // prints true</code></span>
>
> So here's a set that does not contain <code>p</code>, yet <code>p</code> is among the elements of the set! What happened, of course, is that after the change to the <code>x</code> field, the point <code>p</code> ended up in the wrong hash bucket of the set <code>coll</code>. That is, its original hash bucket no longer corresponded to the new value of its hash code. In a manner of speaking, the point <code>p</code> “dropped out of sight” in the set <code>coll</code> even though it still belonged to its elements.
>
> The lesson to be drawn from this example is that when <code>equals</code> and <code>hashCode</code> depend on mutable state, it may cause problems for users. If they put such objects into collections, they have to be careful never to modify the depended-on state, and this is tricky. If you need a comparison that takes the current state of an object into account, you should usually name it something else, not <code>equals</code>. Considering the last definition of <code>Point</code>, it would have been preferable to omit a redefinition of <code>hashCode</code> and to name the comparison method <code>equalContents</code>, or some other name different from <code>equals</code>. <code>Point</code> would then have inherited the default implementation of <code>equals</code> and <code>hashCode</code>. So <code>p</code> would have stayed locatable in <code>coll</code> even after the modification to its <code>x</code> field.

> [!expand-ui]- Failing to define equals as an equivalence relation
> The contract of the <code>equals</code> method in <code>Object</code> specifies that <code>equals</code> must implement an equivalence relation on non-<code>null</code> objects:
>
> > - <em>It is <em>reflexive</em>: for any non-null value</em> <code>x</code><em>, the expression</em> <code>x.equals(x)</code> <em>should return</em> <code>true</code><em>.</em>
> > - <em>It is <em>symmetric</em>: for any non-null values</em> <code>x</code> <em>and</em> <code>y</code><em>,</em> <code>x.equals(y)</code> <em>should return</em> <code>true</code> <em>if and only if</em> <code>y.equals(x)</code> <em>returns</em> <code>true</code><em>.</em>
> > - <em>It is <em>transitive</em>: for any non-null values</em> <code>x</code><em>,</em> <code>y</code><em>, and</em> <code>z</code><em>, if</em> <code>x.equals(y)</code> <em>returns</em> <code>true</code> <em>and</em> <code>y.equals(z)</code> <em>returns</em> <code>true</code><em>, then</em> <code>x.equals(z)</code> <em>should return</em> <code>true</code><em>.</em>
> > - <em>It is <em>consistent</em>: for any non-null values</em> <code>x</code> <em>and</em> <code>y</code><em>, multiple invocations of</em> <code>x.equals(y)</code> <em>should consistently return</em> <code>true</code> <em>or consistently return</em> <code>false</code><em>, provided no information used in equals comparisons on the objects is modified.</em>
> > - <em>For any non-null value</em> <code>x</code><em>,</em> <code>x.equals(null)</code> <em>should return</em> <code>false</code><em>.</em>
>
> The definition of <code>equals</code> developed so far for class <code>Point</code> satisfies the contract for <code>equals</code>. However, things become more complicated once subclasses are considered. Say there is a subclass <code>ColoredPoint</code> of <code>Point</code> that adds a field <code>color</code> of type <code>Color</code>. Assume <code>Color</code> is defined as an enum: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public enum Color {</code><br><code>    RED, ORANGE, YELLOW, GREEN, BLUE, INDIGO, VIOLET;</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> <code>ColoredPoint</code> overrides <code>equals</code> to take the new <code>color</code> field into account: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class ColoredPoint extends Point { // Problem: equals not symmetric</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final Color color;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public ColoredPoint(int x, int y, Color color) {</code><br><code>        super(x, y);</code><br><code>        this.color = color;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof ColoredPoint) {</code><br><code>            ColoredPoint that = (ColoredPoint) other;</code><br><code>            result = (this.color.equals(that.color) && super.equals(that));</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> This is what many programmers would likely write. Note that in this case, class <code>ColoredPoint</code> need not override <code>hashCode</code>. Because the new definition of <code>equals</code> on <code>ColoredPoint</code> is stricter than the overridden definition in <code>Point</code> (meaning it equates fewer pairs of objects), the contract for <code>hashCode</code> stays valid. If two colored points are equal, they must have the same coordinates, so their hash codes are guaranteed to be equal as well.
>
> Taking the class <code>ColoredPoint</code> by itself, its definition of <code>equals</code> looks OK. However, the contract for <code>equals</code> is broken once points and colored points are mixed. Consider: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Point p = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code></code><br><code>ColoredPoint cp = new ColoredPoint(1, 2, Color.RED);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(p.equals(cp)); // prints true</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(cp.equals(p)); // prints false</code></span>
>
> The comparison “<code>p equals cp</code>” invokes <code>p</code>'s <code>equals</code> method, which is defined in class <code>Point</code>. This method only takes into account the coordinates of the two points. Consequently, the comparison yields <code>true</code>. On the other hand, the comparison “<code>cp equals p</code>” invokes <code>cp</code>'s <code>equals</code> method, which is defined in class <code>ColoredPoint</code>. This method returns <code>false</code>, because <code>p</code> is not a <code>ColoredPoint</code>. So the relation defined by <code>equals</code> is not symmetric.
>
> The loss in symmetry can have unexpected consequences for collections. Here's an example: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Set\<Point> hashSet1 = new java.util.HashSet\<Point>();</code><br><code>hashSet1.add(p);</code><br><code>System.out.println(hashSet1.contains(cp));    // prints false</code><br><code></code><br><code>Set\<Point> hashSet2 = new java.util.HashSet\<Point>();</code><br><code>hashSet2.add(cp);</code><br><code>System.out.println(hashSet2.contains(p));    // prints true</code></span>
>
> So even though <code>p</code> and <code>cp</code> are equal, one <code>contains</code> test succeeds whereas the other one fails.
>
> How can you change the definition of <code>equals</code> so that it becomes symmetric? Essentially there are two ways. You can either make the relation more general or more strict. Making it more general means that a pair of two objects, <code>a</code> and <code>b</code>, is taken to be equal if either comparing <code>a</code> with <code>b</code> or comparing <code>b</code> with <code>a</code> yields <code>true</code>. Here's code that does this: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class ColoredPoint extends Point { // Problem: equals not transitive</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final Color color;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public ColoredPoint(int x, int y, Color color) {</code><br><code>        super(x, y);</code><br><code>        this.color = color;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof ColoredPoint) {</code><br><code>            ColoredPoint that = (ColoredPoint) other;</code><br><code>            result = (this.color.equals(that.color) && super.equals(that));</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        else if (other instanceof Point) {</code><br><code>            Point that = (Point) other;</code><br><code>            result = that.equals(this);</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> The new definition of <code>equals</code> in <code>ColoredPoint</code> checks one more case than the old one: If the <code>other</code> object is a <code>Point</code> but not a <code>ColoredPoint</code>, the method forwards to the <code>equals</code> method of <code>Point</code>. This has the desired effect of making <code>equals</code> symmetric. Now, both “<code>cp.equals(p)</code>” and “<code>p.equals(cp)</code>” result in <code>true</code>. However, the contract for <code>equals</code> is still broken. Now the problem is that the new relation is no longer transitive! Here's a sequence of statements that demonstrates this. Define a point and two colored points of different colors, all at the same position: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>ColoredPoint redP = new ColoredPoint(1, 2, Color.RED);</code><br><code>ColoredPoint blueP = new ColoredPoint(1, 2, Color.BLUE);</code></span>
>
> Taken individually, <code>redp</code> is equal to <code>p</code> and <code>p</code> is equal to <code>bluep</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>System.out.println(redP.equals(p)); // prints true</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(p.equals(blueP)); // prints true</code></span>
>
> However, comparing <code>redP</code> and <code>blueP</code> yields <code>false</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>System.out.println(redP.equals(blueP)); // prints false</code></span>
>
> Hence, the transitivity clause of <code>equals</code>'s contract is violated.
>
> Making the <code>equals</code> relation more general seems to lead to a dead end. We'll try to make it stricter instead. One way to make <code>equals</code> stricter is to always treat objects of different classes as different. That could be achieved by modifying the <code>equals</code> methods in classes <code>Point</code> and <code>ColoredPoint</code>. In class <code>Point</code>, you could add an extra comparison that checks whether the run-time class of the other <code>Point</code> is exactly the same as this <code>Point</code>'s class, as follows: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>// A technically valid, but unsatisfying, equals method</code><br><code>public class Point {</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final int x;</code><br><code>    private final int y;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public Point(int x, int y) {</code><br><code>        this.x = x;</code><br><code>        this.y = y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getX() {</code><br><code>        return x;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof Point) {</code><br><code>            Point that = (Point) other;</code><br><code>            result = (this.getX() == that.getX() && this.getY() == that.getY()</code><br><code>                    <strong>&& this.getClass().equals(that.getClass())</strong>);</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public int hashCode() {</code><br><code>        return (41 \* (41 + getX()) + getY());</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> You can then revert class <code>ColoredPoint</code>'s implementation back to the version that previously had violated the symmetry requirement:<sup>[4](https://www.artima.com/lejava/articles/equality.html#r4)</sup> <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class ColoredPoint extends Point { // No longer violates symmetry requirement</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final Color color;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public ColoredPoint(int x, int y, Color color) {</code><br><code>        super(x, y);</code><br><code>        this.color = color;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof ColoredPoint) {</code><br><code>            ColoredPoint that = (ColoredPoint) other;</code><br><code>            result = (this.color.equals(that.color) && super.equals(that));</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> Here, an instance of class <code>Point</code> is considered to be equal to some other instance of the same class only if the objects have the same coordinates and they have the same run-time class, meaning <code>.getClass()</code> on either object returns the same value. The new definitions satisfy symmetry and transitivity because now every comparison between objects of different classes yields <code>false</code>. So a colored point can never be equal to a point. This convention looks reasonable, but one could argue that the new definition is too strict.
>
> Consider the following slightly roundabout way to define a point at coordinates <code>(1, 2)</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Point pAnon = new Point(1, 1) {</code><br><code>    @Override public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return 2;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>};</code></span>
>
> Is <code>pAnon</code> equal to <code>p</code>? The answer is no because the <code>java.lang.Class</code> objects associated with <code>p</code> and <code>pAnon</code> are different. For <code>p</code> it is <code>Point</code>, whereas for <code>pAnon</code> it is an anonymous subclass of <code>Point</code>. But clearly, <code>pAnon</code> is just another point at coordinates <code>(1, 2)</code>. It does not seem reasonable to treat it as being different from <code>p</code>.
>
> # The <code>canEqual</code> method
>
> So it seems we are stuck. Is there a sane way to redefine equality on several levels of the class hierarchy while keeping its contract? In fact, there is such a way, but it requires one more method to redefine together with <code>equals</code> and <code>hashCode</code>. The idea is that as soon as a class redefines <code>equals</code> (and <code>hashCode</code>), it should also explicitly state that objects of this class are never equal to objects of some superclass that implement a different equality method. This is achieved by adding a method <code>canEqual</code> to every class that redefines <code>equals</code>. Here's the method's signature: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public boolean canEqual(Object other)</code></span>
>
> The method should return <code>true</code> if the <code>other</code> object is an instance of the class in which <code>canEqual</code> is (re)defined, <code>false</code> otherwise. It is called from <code>equals</code> to make sure that the objects are comparable both ways. Here is a new (and final) implementation of class <code>Point</code> along these lines: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class Point {</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final int x;</code><br><code>    private final int y;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public Point(int x, int y) {</code><br><code>        this.x = x;</code><br><code>        this.y = y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getX() {</code><br><code>        return x;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return y;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof Point) {</code><br><code>            Point that = (Point) other;</code><br><code>            result = (<strong>that.canEqual(this) &&</strong> this.getX() == that.getX() && this.getY() == that.getY());</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public int hashCode() {</code><br><code>        return (41 \* (41 + getX()) + getY());</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    <strong>public boolean canEqual(Object other) { return (other instanceof Point); }</strong></code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> The <code>equals</code> method in this version of class <code>Point</code> contains the additional requirement that the other object <em>can equal</em> this one, as determined by the <code>canEqual</code> method. The implementation of <code>canEqual</code> in <code>Point</code> states that all instances of <code>Point</code> can be equal.
>
> Here's the corresponding implementation of <code>ColoredPoint</code>: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>public class ColoredPoint extends Point { // No longer violates symmetry requirement</code><br><code></code><br><code>    private final Color color;</code><br><code></code><br><code>    public ColoredPoint(int x, int y, Color color) {</code><br><code>        super(x, y);</code><br><code>        this.color = color;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public boolean equals(Object other) {</code><br><code>        boolean result = false;</code><br><code>        if (other instanceof ColoredPoint) {</code><br><code>            ColoredPoint that = (ColoredPoint) other;</code><br><code>            result = (<strong>that.canEqual(this) &&</strong> this.color.equals(that.color) && super.equals(that));</code><br><code>        }</code><br><code>        return result;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    @Override public int hashCode() {</code><br><code>        return (41 \* super.hashCode() + color.hashCode());</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code></code><br><code>    <strong>@Override public boolean canEqual(Object other) { return (other instanceof ColoredPoint); }</strong></code><br><code>}</code></span>
>
> It can be shown that the new definition of <code>Point</code> and <code>ColoredPoint</code> keeps the contract of <code>equals</code>. Equality is symmetric and transitive. Comparing a <code>Point</code> to a <code>ColoredPoint</code> always yields <code>false</code>. Indeed, for any point <code>p</code> and colored point <code>cp</code>, “<code>p.equals(cp)</code>” will return <code>false</code> because “<code>cp.canEqual(p)</code>” will return <code>false</code>. The reverse comparison, “<code>cp.equals(p)</code>”, will also return <code>false</code>, because <code>p</code> is not a <code>ColoredPoint</code>, so the first <code>instanceof</code> check in the body of <code>equals</code> in <code>ColoredPoint</code> will fail.
>
> On the other hand, instances of different subclasses of <code>Point</code> can be equal, as long as none of the classes redefines the equality method. For instance, with the new class definitions, the comparison of <code>p</code> and <code>pAnon</code> would yield true. Here are some examples: <span style="white-space: pre-wrap"><code>Point p = new Point(1, 2);</code><br><code></code><br><code>ColoredPoint cp = new ColoredPoint(1, 2, Color.INDIGO);</code><br><code></code><br><code>Point pAnon = new Point(1, 1) {</code><br><code>    @Override public int getY() {</code><br><code>        return 2;</code><br><code>    }</code><br><code>};</code><br><code></code><br><code>Set\<Point> coll = new java.util.HashSet\<Point>();</code><br><code>coll.add(p);</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(p)); // prints true</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(cp)); // prints false</code><br><code></code><br><code>System.out.println(coll.contains(pAnon)); // prints true</code></span>
>
> These examples demonstrate that if a superclass <code>equals</code> implementation defines and calls <code>canEqual</code>, then programmers who implement subclasses can decide whether or not their subclasses may be equal to instances of the superclass. Because <code>ColoredPoint</code> overrides <code>canEqual</code>, for example, a colored point may never be equal to a plain-old point. But because the anonymous subclass referenced from <code>pAnon</code> does not override <code>canEqual</code>, its instance can be equal to a <code>Point</code> instance.
>
> One potential criticism of the <code>canEqual</code> approach is that it violates the Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP). For example, the technique of implementing <code>equals</code> by comparing run-time classes, which led to the inability to define a subclass whose instances can equal instances of the superclass, has been described as a violation of the LSP.<sup>[5](https://www.artima.com/lejava/articles/equality.html#r5)</sup> The reasoning is that the LSP states you should be able to use (substitute) a subclass instance where a superclass instance is required. In the previous example, however, “<code>coll.contains(cp)</code>” returned <code>false</code> even though <code>cp</code>'s <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> values matched those of the point in the collection. Thus it may seem like a violation of the LSP, because you can't use a <code>ColoredPoint</code> here where a <code>Point</code> is expected. We believe this is the wrong interpretation, though, because the LSP doesn't require that a subclass behaves identically to its superclass, just that it behaves in a way that fulfills the contract of its superclass.
>
> The problem with writing an <code>equals</code> method that compares run-time classes is not that it violates the LSP, but that it doesn't give you a way to create a subclass whose instances can equal superclass instances. For example, had we used the run-time class technique in the previous example, “<code>coll.contains(pAnon)</code>” would have returned <code>false</code>, and that's not what we wanted. By contrast, we really did want “<code>coll.contains(cp)</code>” to return <code>false</code>, because by overriding <code>equals</code> in <code>ColoredPoint</code>, we were basically saying that an indigo-colored point at coordinates (1, 2) is <em>not the same thing</em> as an uncolored point at (1, 2). Thus, in the previous example we were able to pass two different <code>Point</code> subclass instances to the collection's <code>contains</code> method, and we got back two different answers, both correct.
